README.md, before:

# UI Automation test framework (ATF)

ATF is designed to execute testcases for "Booking a car" functionality, the execution can be performed on local machine,
or on CI (Jenkins)


## Getting Started

Development process is done on Ubuntu 18.04, with Java 8


## Configuration

ATF project folder ```artifacts``` holds subfolders for running the project:
  - ```artifacts/binaries``` : holds browser binaries (in case particular browser version has to be tested);
  - ```artifacts/drivers``` : holds Webdriver binaries for Linux, Windows, and Mac OSs;
  - ```artifacts/properties``` : holds properties in JSON format;

All basic configuration needed for the project is stored in ```artifacts/properties/general_property.json``` file.

#### general_property.json
Some important keys:

###### Environment
  - "env" - the main property for the project, possible values are: prod_en, prod_de, intera_en, intera_de.
  Language is set with end part of the value ("..._en" - English, "..._de" - German)
  This value is also set in Jenkins jobs, and is used for remote test runs.

###### Browser 
  - "browser" - string value, choose among Chrome ("ch" or "chrome") or Firefox ("ff" or "firefox");
  - "headless_mode" - boolean value (true/false), should browser open UI part or run without it;
  - "use_browser_binary" - boolean value (true/false), should the default browser version be picked (usually used by OS), or particular browser version (see next key);
  - "chrome_binary" and "firefox_binary" - path, where particular binaries of browser are stored;
  - "path to driver executables" - specifies the exact path where the Web-Driver executables are stored.

#### emails.json

Holds information about emails subjects (in En and De languages) that are received while booking.

## WebDriver executables

In order to automatically run test and open browsers, the driver executables need to be present in the project.
Default path to it: "artifacts/drivers/"
There are FireFox and Chrome drivers for:
- Linux("artifacts/drivers/linux/geckodriver" and "artifacts/drivers/linux/chromedriver"); 
- MacOS("artifacts/drivers/macos/geckodriver" and "artifacts/drivers/macos/chromedriver");
- Windows("artifacts/drivers/windows/geckodriver.exe" and "artifacts/drivers/windows/chromedriver.exe").

More information can be found on:
* [Firefox driver](https://github.com/mozilla/geckodriver/releases)
* [Chrome driver](http://chromedriver.chromium.org/home)  


## Page Object (PO) Pattern

This framework uses PO to separate page classes from tests classes.
There are 2 main base classes:
    BasePage.java
    BaseTestCase.java

Every page (HomePage, BookingPage...) is inherited from BasePage.
Every testcase is inherited from BaseTestCase.

All pages are instantiated in BaseTestCase.java:

```
    protected HomePage homePage;
    
    public void initPages(){
        homePage = new HomePage(driver);
        ...
    }
```

Doing this, writing the testcase becomes very straightforward:

```
    @Test
    public void navigateToBookingPage() {
        homePage.start()
                .clickBookVehicle();
        bookingPage.verifyBookingPageDisplayed();
    }
```

## Screenshots

The framework enables to take a screenshot of failed test.
The method is called in "@AfterMethod", and takes 3 arguments: result of the testcase (failed or not, path to screenshot folder, and driver instance).


```
@AfterMethod(alwaysRun = true)
    public void closeBrowser(ITestResult result) {
        long time = result.getEndMillis() - result.getStartMillis();
        LOG.info("=== FINISHED : <<<" + result.getName() + ">>>  RESULT: <<<"+ getResultDescription(result.getStatus()) + ">>> ===");
        LOG.info("=== TIME SPENT: " + time / 1000.0 + " seconds");

        takeScreenshot(result, SCREENSHOTS_FOLDER, driver);
        driver.quit();
    }
```

To change the screenshot rule (i.e. take screenshot of every test), please change the condition ( result.getStatus() ) of taking screenshots:

```
    public static void takeScreenshot(ITestResult result, String folderName, WebDriver d) {
        if(result.getStatus() == ITestResult.FAILURE ||
                result.getStatus() == ITestResult.SKIP) {
            try {
                takeScreenshotWithWebdriver(result, folderName, d);
                LOG.info("Screenshot taken");
            } catch (Exception e) {
                LOG.info("Exception while taking screenshot!");
                e.printStackTrace();
            }
        }
    }
```


## Video Recording

To enable video recording of failed test in the framework library "video-recorder-testng" is used (dependency in pom.xml file). If a test is annotated with "@Video", it will be recorded in case of fail.

```
    @Video
    @Test
    public void loggedUserCanChangeCountry(){
        ...
    }
```

For details please check : 
(https://github.com/SergeyPirogov/video-recorder-examples)


## REST API test

ATF framework allows executing REST call and verifying the responses:

```
        get(url)
            .then()
            .contentType(ContentType.HTML)
            .and()
            .assertThat()
            .statusCode(200);
```


### Install these software and libraries

Install these software and libraries:
  - Java 8
  - Maven
  - IntelliJIDEA
  - Selenium libraries. Good tutorial to install Selenium:
    https://www.guru99.com/intellij-selenium-webdriver.html


## Built With

* [Java 8](https://java.com) - Main coding language
* [IntelliJIDEA](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/) - Java IDE
* [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/) - Dependency Management
* [Selenium](https://www.seleniumhq.org/) - Web Application test tool

Commit message:

add info about json files

README.md, after:

# UI Automation test framework (ATF)

ATF is designed to execute testcases for "Booking a car" functionality, the execution can be performed on local machine,
or on CI (Jenkins)


## Getting Started

Development process is done on Ubuntu 18.04, with Java 8


## Configuration

ATF project folder ```artifacts``` holds subfolders for running the project:
  - ```artifacts/binaries``` : holds browser binaries (in case particular browser version has to be tested);
  - ```artifacts/drivers``` : holds Webdriver binaries for Linux, Windows, and Mac OSs;
  - ```artifacts/properties``` : holds properties in JSON format;

All basic configuration needed for the project is stored in ```artifacts/properties/general_property.json``` file.

#### general_property.json
Some important keys:

###### Environment
  - "env" - the main property for the project, possible values are: prod_en, prod_de, intera_en, intera_de.
  Language is set with end part of the value ("..._en" - English, "..._de" - German)
  This value is also set in Jenkins jobs, and is used for remote test runs.

###### Browser 
  - "browser" - string value, choose among Chrome ("ch" or "chrome") or Firefox ("ff" or "firefox");
  - "headless_mode" - boolean value (true/false), should browser open UI part or run without it;
  - "use_browser_binary" - boolean value (true/false), should the default browser version be picked (usually used by OS), or particular browser version (see next key);
  - "chrome_binary" and "firefox_binary" - path, where particular binaries of browser are stored;
  - "path to driver executables" - specifies the exact path where the Web-Driver executables are stored.

#### emails.json

Holds information about emails subjects (in English and German languages) that are received while booking.

#### time_pattern.json

Holds time pattern for creating file name during making screenshots, 
and time pattern for booking an auto.

#### urls.json

Holds URLs which are used in ATF.

#### users.json

Holds cashed login and password to access email (app2driver@yahoo.com) and login to app2drive.com . 

## WebDriver executables

In order to automatically run test and open browsers, the driver executables need to be present in the project.
Default path to it: "artifacts/drivers/"
There are FireFox and Chrome drivers for:
- Linux("artifacts/drivers/linux/geckodriver" and "artifacts/drivers/linux/chromedriver"); 
- MacOS("artifacts/drivers/macos/geckodriver" and "artifacts/drivers/macos/chromedriver");
- Windows("artifacts/drivers/windows/geckodriver.exe" and "artifacts/drivers/windows/chromedriver.exe").

More information can be found on:
* [Firefox driver](https://github.com/mozilla/geckodriver/releases)
* [Chrome driver](http://chromedriver.chromium.org/home)  


## Page Object (PO) Pattern

This framework uses PO to separate page classes from tests classes.
There are 2 main base classes:
    BasePage.java
    BaseTestCase.java

Every page (HomePage, BookingPage...) is inherited from BasePage.
Every testcase is inherited from BaseTestCase.

All pages are instantiated in 
###### BaseTestCase.java:

```
    protected HomePage homePage;
    
    public void initPages(){
        homePage = new HomePage(driver);
        ...
    }
```

Doing this, writing the testcase becomes very straightforward
###### for example  - A2DNavigationTests.java:

```
    @Test
    public void navigateToBookingPage() {
        homePage.start()
                .clickBookVehicle();
        bookingPage.verifyBookingPageDisplayed();
    }
```

## Screenshots

The framework enables to take a screenshot of failed test.
The method is called in "@AfterMethod", and takes 3 arguments: result of the testcase (failed or not, path to screenshot folder, and driver instance).

```
@AfterMethod(alwaysRun = true)
    public void closeBrowser(ITestResult result) {
        long time = result.getEndMillis() - result.getStartMillis();
        LOG.info("=== FINISHED : <<<" + result.getName() + ">>>  RESULT: <<<"+ getResultDescription(result.getStatus()) + ">>> ===");
        LOG.info("=== TIME SPENT: " + time / 1000.0 + " seconds");

        takeScreenshot(result, SCREENSHOTS_FOLDER, driver);
        driver.quit();
    }
```

To change the screenshot rule (i.e. take screenshot of every test), please change the condition ( result.getStatus() ) of taking screenshots:

```
    public static void takeScreenshot(ITestResult result, String folderName, WebDriver d) {
        if(result.getStatus() == ITestResult.FAILURE ||
                result.getStatus() == ITestResult.SKIP) {
            try {
                takeScreenshotWithWebdriver(result, folderName, d);
                LOG.info("Screenshot taken");
            } catch (Exception e) {
                LOG.info("Exception while taking screenshot!");
                e.printStackTrace();
            }
        }
    }
```


## Video Recording

To enable video recording of failed test in the framework library "video-recorder-testng" is used (dependency in pom.xml file). If a test is annotated with "@Video", it will be recorded in case of fail.

```
    @Video
    @Test
    public void loggedUserCanChangeCountry(){
        ...
    }
```

For details please check : 
(https://github.com/SergeyPirogov/video-recorder-examples)


## REST API test

ATF framework allows executing REST call and verifying the responses:

```
        get(url)
            .then()
            .contentType(ContentType.HTML)
            .and()
            .assertThat()
            .statusCode(200);
```


### Install these software and libraries

Install these software and libraries:
  - Java 8
  - Maven
  - IntelliJIDEA
  - Selenium libraries. Good tutorial to install Selenium:
    https://www.guru99.com/intellij-selenium-webdriver.html


## Built With

* [Java 8](https://java.com) - Main coding language
* [IntelliJIDEA](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/) - Java IDE
* [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/) - Dependency Management
* [Selenium](https://www.seleniumhq.org/) - Web Application test tool
